*** MetaindeX Tutorials ***
4- Explore connections within your data
In this tutorial, we'll see how to export GEXF (graph) files
to explore connections within your data with the Open-Source tool Gephi
let's have a look to our original data file
the one we've imported into MetaindeX in tutorial 2
if you remember the field favorite_artist_id
contains the id of another artist of our corpus
that's what we call a link and that's what
we gonna explore in this tutorial
now let's log in MetaindeX
we have imported this favorite_artist_id field
as a LINK type, rather than TINY_TEXT
so that MetaindeX knows that contents shall be
a reference to another artist id
what we can see there is an artist name rather the original id
that's what MetaindeX shows us for conveniency
but underlying value is still the raw id itself
so each artist points to its favorite artist
now we'll generate a graph file (format GEXF)
clicking on the related button on left panel
we can select which data to export
and using favorite_artist_id field for the links
in Basic mode, each artist is exported as a node,
and each link as a edge of the graph
we click to retrieve the GEXF file,
we open it with Gephi tool
85 nodes are detected (85 artists)
and 85 edges (1 favorite artist each)
Gephi interface is made of 3 panels :
- overview : control the graph
- data laboratory : explore and transform data
a bit like OpenRefine
- preview : customize graph display and export (pdf,svg,jpg)
back to overview, Graph panel is a view of the nodes and edges
Appearance panel to control the way nodes and edges are displayed
Layout panel to control the disposition of the nodes
let's customize the nodes colors
based on corresponding type
and size based on nb_guitars
maybe size based on number of in-going links is more relevant
this way the bigger the node
the more other artists like him
adding nodes labels
so Paco de Lucia seems to be quite popular !
now we'll arrange nodes layout
which means improving nodes distribution in the view
there are several algorithms we can use for that
but no absolute good solution
so we generally play with various algorihtms
until we are satisfied (enough) ...
we can maybe do some local improvements if needed
we'll now switch to preview panel to finalize the graph
and export it
I like black background, aren't you?
we clearly need to fix labels size
and make edges thicker
let's save that graph as SVG file
we close this graph and go back to MetaindeX now
we'll now study connections between types
using Group mode option : documents are grouped
depending on value of one of their field
it's actually quite similar to Kibana buckets
so we decide to group them by type
"writer" "actor" "guitarist" "filmdirector"
still using field favorite_artist_id for the links
and we download the file and import it in Gephi
same procedure than before
only 4 nodes detected this time as expected
so let's improve a bit the layout
the size attribute is the number of artists contained by each node
it has been added by MetaindeX during the graph generation
so let's make bigger nodes containing more artists
and try to improve a bit more the layout
going to preview to finalize and prepare export
edges are in the direction of the clockwise curve
so we can deduce the edge direction based on the side the curve is
making edges a bit thicker
so we see from this graph that quite few actors like writers
and no writer at all like an actor
and we save this graph too
*** The End ***
see also other MetaindeX tutorials for
- statistics with Kibana
- and more ...